Okay, so welcome to the talk about OpenDesk, the open source collaborative suite presented
by Klemah Obang from Exviki and Vila Lydantal from Open Projects.
Enjoy.
Hello.
Hello, everybody.
Thanks for coming.
The funny thing is we are not OpenDesk.
We're just vendors.
We're just contributing to OpenDesk, but we come to this later.
Yeah, OpenDesk, what is that?
That is an idea of building an alternative to Microsoft Office 365 or to Google Apps
that come to the public sectors.
They are used everywhere, and public sector wants to have an alternative to that.
So if you really want to go after the big elephant that is not in the room, we're trying
to create an alternative to that.
So probably it's the biggest opportunity for open source software right now.
Let's say at least in the realm of collaboration and working together.
So OpenDesk is a powerful initiative of the German government with a goal to provide a
serious alternative to the proprietary Big Tech establishment.
It unites independent open source software vendors to create a sovereign workplace tailored
for the public sector.
We too here, we are just nerds.
We're just software developers.
I'm from outside.
I work for and co-founded Open Project.
So that is one of the parts of the solutions here that we will talk about.
But I'm software engineer.
I'm not OpenDesk.
And this is Clément.
Hello.
So, well, you maybe have seen me during the room this morning.
So my name is Clément Aubert.
I'm an XQQ committer and I also work at XQQ SAS to do sales mainly.
Okay.
So well, let's start by discussing a little bit about the story of OpenDesk and how we
got there essentially.
So the issue with essentially collaborative suites goes a long way, right?
Since 2015, especially in Western EU, so when I'm talking about Western EU, it's mainly
French and German government because from more point of view, that's where we have the
most information, let's say.
Since 2015, what we see is that there are growing concerns when it comes to the US-based
cloud offering that exists in order to create collaborative suites.
And these concerns are mainly regarding the fact that you don't necessarily have control
on your data.
You don't know exactly where it is being stored, how it is being processed.
There are especially privacy risks.
If you are putting sensitive data, maybe they could be accessed in different ways.
In particular, since 2018, there is an extra territorial law that exists in the US that
allows the government to ask a company to access customer data, even though the data
of the customer may not be from a US citizen.
Just for, let's say, well, usually to get more information about that customer.
And then there is the big question of locking, essentially, when you migrate your data.
How easy it is to make it back?
Are there any open standards that exist in order to do it the other way around?
These concerns exist.
And so actually, since late, well, the end of 2010 and beginning of 2020, French and
Germany have started to create some rules when it comes to the handling of critical data
in their government.
In France in particular, there is an initiative which is called Cloud Nubu and Cloud Pi, which
is essentially two cloud specifications that are used for public administrations.
One is for, let's say, conventional data and another one is for more sensitive data.
Germany also started another initiative, which is the Deutsche Verwaltungs-Cloud strategy,
which is, let's say, kind of the same.
It creates kind of a standard in order to protect the data that is used by public administration
from the external actors.
So this is essentially, to be clear, this is essentially infrastructures or definition
of infrastructure that should be implemented by the state so that on the long run, states
have the capability to host some data securely for them.
In the meantime, there is the question of having security certifications, basically
making sure that the different vendors that will provide a specific service for you, they
have the necessary amount of security to provide that service.
And so in the same idea, there are two standards that were created over the past years.
In France, we have SecNumCloud.
SecNumCloud has been created by the ANC.
It's basically derived from another security standard, which is called ISO 27001.
If you are doing security, you may know about it because it's well known.
And what SecNumCloud does is that basically it takes most of the rules from ISO 27001,
but it adds also controls when it comes to the nationality of the people and the location
of the people that are allowed to process the data.
The whole goal of SecNumCloud is to protect from extraterritorialities, in particular
the US Cloud Act that I mentioned.
In Germany, there is also another certification, which is called BSI C5, and we will talk about
it afterwards because it's quite important.
The goal is to basically be able to qualify a specific application that you want to deploy
on a cloud offering that you want to deploy to be used by public institutions.
So C5 certification is a little bit different in the sense that it's not about extraterritoriality
at this point.
It is more about basically making sure that the application is correctly developed.
There is a good standard of quality when it comes to the change that you are applying
to your application.
You validate its compliance, etc.
On the long term, so if you are residing in Europe, in the EU, there is a vision to create
one unified standard, which is mainly based out of SecNumCloud and C5, which could be
called the ES Cloud that would encapsulate and basically allow any vendor to qualify
to this standard in order to be deployed in the different governmental public administrations
in the EU.
So that's very nice.
We are actually introducing new laws that allow us to control what can be put and what
can be used by public administration, but in the meantime, we may not be creating solutions
here.
So that's another issue that has been tackled by France and Germany over the past few years.
In France, over the past like in 2021-222, there is a project that was started that was
pushed by the DGE, which is the Extranger Neral des entreprises.
It's a branch of the finance ministry.
The goal was to create different consortium that would lead the creation of an alternative
suite to things such as Office 365 or Google Workplace.
The ones that Wilhelm talked about.
So it's a project that has been started in 2023.
The total of the project is around 23 million that has been invested by the state for the
three consortiums.
The idea is to have results by 226.
Now we will not talk about them that much because it's actually not based on fully open
source software, so it's not really the scope of this talk.
The one we are interested in here is the project from Germany, which is OpenDesk.
And the idea of OpenDesk is essentially, so it's a really different approach.
In Germany, there is the Ministry of Interior.
I will not say the name in German because it's going to be a nightmare.
The Ministry of Interior decided in 2022 to create a consortium made of different actors,
so we'll see them afterwards.
But essentially, Dataport, which is a big service provider for public administration
in Germany, as well as a couple of vendors, software vendors, are providing open source
software.
And the Ministry decided to group them together in order to create a platform which is coherent,
fully open source, and can basically last longer and be maintained over time.
So to give you an idea, in France, the financing for the three consortium I mentioned is like
around 23 million, knowing that there is a little bit of a loan there, so you have to
reimburse it.
And then in Germany, it's basically orders, so it's not a loan, and the budget into 23
was 23 million, so a little bit more budget.
So if we go into the details of OpenDesk, so the project was initially started by the
German Ministry of Interior.
Today it's being handled over to Zendes, which is also a public organization that has been
created in order to handle, let's say, open source projects that have been created by the
federal state.
And so, as I mentioned, the project is currently co-managed with multiple actors, so there
is the Bundesministerium, the Ministry of Interior, the BMI, PWC, which is helping on trying to
have, find use cases, basically, find the correct user stories, the issues that we are
trying to solve with our collaborative workplace.
Data Port, which I mentioned, which is providing, basically, hosting for the project, and is
also doing a lot of work in order to organize the different vendors all working together
to create a unified workplace and create a product that works.
And then we also have Bechle, which is present for helping on the financing of the project.
So we talked about the vendors today in this project, in the OpenDesk project we have around
a little bit more than 500 people that are working from both the different vendors, PWC,
BMI, and Data Port and Bechle.
So that's quite a large project in the end.
I will get to the name of the vendors afterwards, but this is just kind of a quick view of what
we're trying to achieve, right?
Basically we're trying to achieve one solution, one workplace that fills in different needs.
We want to have email management, of course, you need to have emails, you also want to
create events, so you will have calendar modules, contacts, task management, we want to also
have the file management parts where we can create new files, collaborate on them, and
then you also may want to continue working on your projects, so develop projects within
your organization, for that we have a project management tool, a knowledge base tool, and
you also want to communicate with your co-workers, so there is modules about chats and video
conferencing.
So all these projects, the idea of OpenDesk is essentially that these modules should be
made of solutions that can be switched easily.
The ideal vision of OpenDesk would be that basically you have a software which is providing
the email functionality, but let's say that tomorrow you want to switch it, you don't
want to use the default version, the default software that is provided, then you should
be able to do the switch fairly easily.
So in practice today we are providing some sort of a default implementation, meaning
that we have a couple of software that correspond to each of these features, and we don't really
have two options for file management.
Yes, that's a very important part because the German state don't want to get back into
the vendor lock, so that's the reason why it's talking about mail and not about a certain
vendor.
Exactly.
So if we look a little bit more in the details, so when it comes to everything which is related
to email, agenda, contact management, calendar, and task, OpenExchange is handling today that
big part of the project.
When it comes to file management, it's mainly in NextCloud, and in NextCloud when you want
to collaborate on different files, we have two external tools that have been integrated,
so Collabra for which we had a talk a couple of minutes ago, and also CripPad, which we
had a talk this morning, so they are used in order to edit basically office files, and
for CripPad it's for editing diagrams today.
When it comes to the communication, so we have Element which is handling, so Element
based on Matrix, which is handling everything which is related to chats between teams, and
there is a clever integration between Element and GC, the integration is provided by Nordic
to basically allow to have video conferencing and basically rooms within Element where you
can start calls and make calls and chats on a specific subject.
Then on the project management capabilities, there are us, so OpenProject as part of the
project management tool, and NextWiki for knowledge management.
I would say that we are rather the, OpenProject and NextWiki are kind of the latest projects
in the project, right?
We arrived at least in NextWiki, we arrived at the end of 222, so not that far away, and
not that long ago.
Finally, so this whole portal that you see here, it's managed by Univention, which is
another solution that allows to create user portals and it's also handling access management,
authentication, user list, et cetera, et cetera.
Single sign on.
Yeah, single sign on also.
So today the development of the project is managed by the hosting of everything which
is related to the development of the project is managed by Dataport, so thanks to them.
So we'll get to, at some point we'll try to do a demo if we have internet, but let's
go a little bit more in the technical details.
So today the architecture of OpenDesk is mainly based on Kubernetes, mainly because we are
integrating a lot of different components, and at some point it was decided to use Kubernetes
because it was the easiest basically to integrate all this complexity into one big package.
So we are using Helm charts and GitLab CI to deploy Kubernetes cluster, and then basically
each component of this cluster is one application managed by one vendor.
Each vendor can provide either a generic Docker image that needs a little bit of configuration
in order to work within the context of OpenDesk, or sometimes some vendors will provide really
a tailored application with, so a tailored custom Docker image that meets some specific
requirements, and well, so sometimes there are also other ways to deliver basically the
applications.
Yeah, a quick look at the features I may not have completely talked about.
So of course it comes with a user directory managed by Inevention. All the applications
are connected between each other through OpenID Connect, so that's very easy in some way
and very standard, and we also have unified navigation across the different applications,
that's something I want to show you in the demo.
And finally, the goal of the project is really to make sure that all these components that
we are integrating, they are connected together like fully.
And so that's going to be very important. I would say it's a work in progress, but we'll
see in the later part of the talk that we have, for example, examples of integrations
between OpenProject and NextCloud, which are very exciting to see.
Yeah, a little bit of a note. Also, when it comes to the distribution of OpenDesk, of
course, it's made of OpenSource software, but the whole build itself, the whole project
itself is OpenSource. And actually, you can access it on OpenCode, which is a GitLab instance
that is used by the German state to publish its OpenSource projects.
So there you should find basically a mirror of all the source code used by all the components
of OpenDesk. But we will also find dedicated repositories with all the handcharts that are
needed in order to deploy the platform.
Another thing in order to be secure, to provide some security and compliance, so every release
is signed. We create software builds of materials. We audit also the licenses of the different
components that are being integrated within the workplace in order to make sure that we
are really completely free OpenSource. The idea is essentially to have something that
will work for the German administration and working for the German administration means
being BSI C5 compliant. So as part of the project, we also have a little bit of work
in order to help each component be, well, match the certification in terms of quality
of development, for example. Finally, and maybe we'll talk a little bit about it later
on, there is a big concern on accessibility. It's one of the things that we see that I'm
the most talked about about OpenSource software. It's nice. It has a lot of features, but maybe
sometimes it's not fully accessible. Well, as part of this project, we have to match
also some accessibility guidelines in order to be used for the public sector. So this
is also part of the final thing that we get from the project along with security.
On the offering side, so the goal, the long-term goal for the project is essentially to have,
today there are plans to create offers for the public administration in Germany, mainly
through two entities. One is Zendes that we talked about, which is currently, let's say,
coordinating the project at a very high level from the federal government perspective.
And also DataPort, which is participating to the project as part of the project management,
but DataPort has its own also suite, which is basically a fork of OpenDesk with some
extra components that are not necessarily OpenSource that have been added or modified
in order to answer some specific needs. So, yeah, today mainly offering for the German
markets, but not really for the rest of Europe. So that's going to be a challenge for later.
But there's interest from all over Europe in the product, so the French government
also is interested. Yeah, Austria, I think.
Australia, Sweden. So it's a big thing in Europe, and people are looking from all sides
on that project.
Okay, so let's try to do a quick demo. Let me see. Okay, so let's do it very quickly.
Whoops. So this is, okay, this is an OpenDesk instance that we are using for review. So
I just want to show you very quickly the different applications that are available.
So let's say that I want to go to my emails. We are fully dependent on FOSDM network,
so I hope it's going to load. Okay, great. So email, we are running on OpenExchange.
So if you know OpenExchange, you probably already recognize this interface. What you
see is that it's, so all the applications have been customized so that they have a color
theme that matches, that is unified in order to have like a nice user experience. I can
use a user directory which is based on the user that are registered in my OpenDesk instance.
I can potentially add, in my email, I can add files, and when I'm selecting files,
I have the choice of uploading a file from my computer, but I can also link a file from
my next cloud account. And so if I do that, it will create a share automatically and make
sure that whoever is receiving the email has the necessary access to see the file. This
one, no. Okay, this one, thank you. Okay, so apart from that, in the email application,
you will see that we have this little button here, and that's the transversal menu. It
allows us to switch from one application to another, and it will change depending on
your access rights. So we can look at, for example, next cloud, so integrated for the
file management. Here I can, so I can create my file, I can create spreadsheets, and in
that case, it will create a document that will be open within Collaborah. So I can edit
it. We also have files that can be diagrams that we can edit directly with CripPad, so
for that we integrated CripPad within OpenDesk for one specific functionality, and here we
are using draw.io actually within CripPad. We can also look at maybe chats, in which
case it's going to be a managed instance of matrix and element of the frontend, where
I can have discussions with the other member of my OpenDesk instance or potentially other
member of the Matrix Federation. And here what you see is that I'm actually part of
a room which is used for a specific meeting within Matrix. And so these rooms, they can
be created automatically when I'm in the agenda of OpenExchange. I create a new event and I
say that I want to have a conference in Matrix, and it will create me a link that will help
me to this room, that same format, where I have video conferencing here. I know that
was a bad idea. Let's leave. And I have a whiteboard and I can also chat. Finally, we
also have project management with OpenProject and knowledge management with Xwiki. So here
I can create my new project, I can create my work packages, create some milestones and
link them together. I won't go too much into the details because I don't want to spoil
you. And here we also have a customized Xwiki instance. Today we are synchronizing users
and writes. We don't have particular integrations with third parties with the other applications.
So that's a very quick demo.
And by the way, that is released. So you can download and try it and play around with
that. So it's an open code.
It's open source. So about the roadmap of OpenDesk, essentially the goal is to have
a stable version like this month. As you said, it's already released. The main issue, I would
say when it comes to the deployment, if you want to try it out, is that today there is
still a good part of the documentation which is only in German. And sometimes if you're
not speaking German, it can be a little bit difficult. On the longer run in 224.
We are trying very hard.
Yeah, yeah.
It's just a few contributions for translation. I'm welcome, I guess.
Exactly. You can do a full request. And so the idea in 224 is to have like more improvements
in order to improve the BSIC5 compliance. Remember, the goal is to deploy that within
the German federal administration and also within some German lenders. So compliance
to any standard that exists for the public sector is really important for the project.
And it's good because it allows to also improve the open source projects that are behind, that
are being bundled in the platform.
Yeah.
Yeah. So, I mean, we are super vendors like OpenProject or XWiki. For us, the perspective
is a little bit different on that whole project of the whole OpenDesk because we already have
a product. We already have clients. We already have a roadmap. And then suddenly someone
says, hey, we want to integrate you, but you should have the same look and feel. We want
to have the single sign on. We want you to finally come together and create deep integrations.
So that is challenging for us because usually we tend to stay in our own soup because it's
easier to build stuff in our own software. And integrations are complex. You need to
organize. You need to find collaboration, like meetings with others, line roadmaps and
important priorities. That's difficult. And now suddenly someone from the outside comes
like, no, we want you guys to work together.
And we will pay you, actually.
Yes. So by integrating two very, very multiple different types of applications, we are going
to build very deeply specialized applications. By integrating them, we create a multiple
value. We multiply the value instead of everyone brewing their own soup. So also for us, it's
a huge chance because if, let's say, XWiki is integrating with us, then maybe their clients,
which are also likely to use OpenProject, would also book OpenProject, like the professional
services. So for us, it's a huge, huge opportunity. And with OpenDesk, it comes like, okay, the
German government also wants that it's easy to procure so that not every little city needs
to go through a tender.
Tender processes.
Tender processes. So it will be much easier for a small city to book services from us.
Right? So, and with that, we can build better software and we can better integrate.
So maybe some challenges before we dive into more, like how we create integrations, basically.
So some challenges that we see today is integration between the UI and the UX, so the products,
of course, it's difficult to, well, basically not all software are created equals when it
comes to the capacity to customize them because sometimes it has not been thought out from
the beginning.
Yeah.
Oh, sorry.
So there is a big challenge on UI and UX. There is also a question of overlapping features.
Sometimes us as vendors, we create features like, we create, I don't know, like a task
management feature in XWiki, which collides with OpenProject or a Wiki in OpenProject
that collides with XWiki.
Well, we have to find solutions for that, but usually we are like civilized, so it's okay.
One issue is also like maintaining all these customizations that we are creating outside
of the core of our products.
So basically, we create an overlay that makes our application compatible with OpenDesk,
but then like, how do we get the financing for that?
Like, how do we maintain it?
And if it's really difficult to maintain it across new versions, like, how do we do it?
And so far, we need to find solutions on the long term for this.
Talking about integrations, like, of course, these two systems, they don't exist only in
OpenDesk.
We exist outside OpenDesk as well.
And then integration also makes sense.
And those people might not have the whole OpenDesk infrastructure.
So we always, when we build integrations, we want to build it in a way that is also suitable
for other environments where the software could run separately.
Exactly.
And so last thing is a creation of offerings.
We mentioned the fact that other EU countries are interested.
So apart from Germany, so that's going to be a challenge on the long term to find ways
to provide OpenDesk in the public sector, maybe for other actors or even for the private sector.
Yep.
So.
Yeah.
To also go a little bit into an example for, I always like to talk about integrations because
I think this is where the power lies in collaboration.
I want to go into one example that I was working on with my team.
That's the NextCloud and OpenProject integration.
I somewhat sub-staffed this already presented last year here, but I want to have a different
point of view on that.
So quickly, okay.
So NextCloud is mainly for us here today.
It's a file storage platform.
And OpenProject is something like, let's say, Jira or something like that.
So you create and organize your work in work packages, issues, whatever you call them.
And you can have them organized in gun charts or boards or whatever you need.
So, okay.
So we have a file management environment and we have a project management environment.
And the outside perspective, let's say the public sector, they have a different perspective
on that.
They are saying like, where are the files for my task?
Two things in one sentence, right?
Does everyone in my team have access?
Oh, so we are in project management system.
We're organizing our work.
The files are in a different system.
Access management, okay.
The third problem is I want to do the same thing over and over again, like doing the same processes,
having the same steps organized in projects, task by task by task by task.
And also I want to have the same template files and the same folder structure, having this all again and again.
And they both need to go together.
So what they don't want is that we, as OpenProject, that we build our own file management system
because NextCloud is pretty good at that.
And it's also integrated in the desktop and so on.
Like people want to work on files like in the NextCloud experience.
But also NextCloud might not be the best choice for organizing complex projects.
Okay, it has the deck, right?
But if you really want to go a bit more professional, probably OpenProject is a good idea.
So from the public sector, they don't want these tiny solutions.
They want the integrated solutions, right?
And also it's not only OpenDesk, like other clients like the City of Cologne
or the University of Duisburg, Essen or the Deutsche Bahn.
They want the integration. They don't want the separate solutions.
For us, it's easier to focus, if we integrate, it's much easier to focus on project management.
Why, for example, NextCloud could benefit from focus on file management and so on.
So this integration creates a great value in the combination.
And also it's interesting, like once already mentioned, if we work together,
and it's like NextLogest and Example, but if we all work together,
then the sales also becomes easier because we all have clients that the others don't have yet.
And with that joining together, joining forces in the integration of sales,
we together then can capture a bigger market, get more money to build more open source software.
Okay, little examples for how this looks like.
So this is OpenProject. You have a work package.
And on the right-hand side, you see files that are related to that task, which is baking pizza.
I love baking pizza.
And the interesting thing is you can see the files that are necessary for this baking of pizza on the right-hand side.
But the files are not an OpenProject. They are NextCloud.
And in NextLog, when they change their name, this name will change here as well.
If they change their location, these links will still work.
So this deeply integrated reference integrity, that is what you need in order to get away from chaos.
This is what actually organizations want. They want to get rid of chaos.
They want to have control over this stuff.
Access control.
So for projects in OpenProject, you can have something that's called a project folder.
So we, OpenProject, we create folders in NextCloud for which we manage the access.
So members of a project, this is the scope of a team, right?
They need to have the access to the stuff that they want to have access to.
So we say, okay, here in NextCloud, these people have access to it, fully automatically managed.
That helps people to keep the data where it belongs to, the files where they belong to.
So we are working on this project. Here are the files. Put them there in that folder.
Okay, don't put them anywhere else.
And if you leave the company, they're still there, right?
If you're in the organization, they're still there.
And then on the NextCloud side, also deeply integrated, we can show you which task of work packages are actually relevant for that file
or where this file is used in.
Let's say you have a template file for an employment contract, right?
So where is this used and in which contracts is that file used?
So you can find them on the right-hand side, directly jump into the work package of OpenProject and find the processes there.
So the bottom line is like integrated. We are much, much stronger.
Exactly.
Exactly. Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you. I think we have some time for questions.
So...
Yes, I'll do it.
Are we going to have to figure out the way to answer that?
Yeah.
Oh, you're going to give him a question.
Thanks for the talk.
Are there any license requirements in order to integrate into the OpenDesk infrastructure?
And second question is, which vendor, so to speak, is kind of the product owner of the dashboard and the top bar we saw,
and what are the requirements for them, which all apps share?
So the first question, okay.
So for the first question on the license requirements, there are some requirements.
So basically anything that you have to commit on OpenCode needs to match within the list of authorized license by the German administration,
by the admins of OpenCode.
The list is not fully compatible with the one that is provided by the OpenSource initiative.
So it's a little bit shorter.
Basically we found that the hard way, essentially when, for example, if you have a software, you package it as a Docker image,
and then when you have to upload the Docker image on OpenCode, you have to provide an SBOM for it with the license,
and then you found out that in the base Docker image that you are depending, there is a Pearl library with a weird license header,
and so it creates an exception, and you have like three months of review to make sure that it's okay to have that in OpenDesk.
So it's a little bit of a mess.
There is a list available on OpenCode for the license.
When it comes to product ownership, I'm not 100% sure.
I believe that it's, so the design of the navigation bar,
it's managed by the, I think it's managed by either Zendes, which is like handling the project at a high level,
and Zendes has been helped by consulting, by PWC, which is doing consulting and usability tests on top of OpenDesk.
And the same goes for the portal, I believe.
Thank you. Any other questions?
And technically the widget port that you saw, the answer is the Univention.
Yeah, thank you again for the talk.
I have two questions.
One is very specific.
I'm from Lassen, Germany, and I've heard of Project Phoenix.
You wrote Project, or D-Project Phoenix.
Is there some difference, or is it just that Project Phoenix?
And the second question is, is there...
Is there a data port over there?
Okay, can I just phrase the second question?
The second question is, if you're in the context of a company which does not have an own IT and stuff like that,
but likes to keep to an open source software where you can switch vendors,
are there vendors just providing this setup where you can get an account and use it for your company?
There's the idea of the job of data port, for being one of the potential hosts of that D-Pheonics suite.
So then you could get that product from there just by renting it.
But I think they just offer the services to public administration.
I'll try to answer it.
I'm a part of the Project Phoenix and also have a little insight of OpenDesk.
The thing is Phoenix is a branch of this OpenDesk, and what was your question exactly?
They just wrote D-Projects.
Yeah, it's the same. There was some name changes on the way to the product.
D means data port, they dropped it, and now it's Phoenix, so it's basically the same product.
Is that like the second generation?
No, no, no, it's just renaming, you know?
And is there a possibility just to rent this somewhere for small companies who don't run an own IT?
Not to my knowledge, but if there is a high demand on that, that will be possible.
They already do it for some customers, so maybe it's a question of strategy and how much this is asked.
It's Helm charts, right?
So the idea is that it's easy for any host to host it.
And then just to protect... Ah, there's Markus.
You have a mind set?
I'm going to take the questions in order.
But the idea is that it's easy to host it, right?
It shall be easy for any organization in the public sector to simply say,
I have a data center, I just rented somewhere, and I just pull up the hand charts and off we go.
Okay, you mentioned that this German strategy was to put this 23 million in year 2023.
So my question is how does it go forwards on the funding side?
It depends on the German farmers.
Is there kind of a guaranteed maintenance for this code, or like who is taking care of the boring stuff, the security patches and all?
I don't know.
So the budget allocated to the project depends on what's being voted in the parliament.
There are budget cuts nowadays.
I think so.
I'm not 100% sure, but globally there is still budget on the project.
It's about half of what we had last year.
The budget repetition is another issue, right?
It's basically like around 30 million dedicated to open projects in 2024 to be validated.
Open desks, sorry.
And sorry, what was the second question again?
Who's handling the long-term maintenance of the security patches?
So the goal on the long term is essentially to find a business model so that whenever you are deploying an open desk,
there is a team that is managing basically the packaging of open desks, making sure that the Helm chart are up to date, et cetera.
So this team needs to find some funding, and the idea would be to have, like, if you are taking professional support, basically the team would get a part of the funding.
And then the idea is also to redistribute this funding to the vendors themselves in some way.
The specifics of this distribution here, they are not fully defined, basically,
because we are really right at the point where we have this default implementation of open desk that is just going out.
And now there is a second step of finding the first clients and making sure that it deploys properly, basically.
Okay, any other questions?
I'm going to take some people that haven't spoken just for, like, distribution.
Thank you.
First of all, thanks for the talk.
That's a really interesting project.
And I just wanted to ask if there is an interest of at some point adding any repository tools or, for instance, I don't know, pipelining CI CD tools to the platform?
I will repeat the question so that it's registered.
I'm so sorry.
So that it's registered.
Whether there's any integration of repository or pipelining?
Right now, yeah.
Right now not.
I personally think it makes perfect sense.
I would very much welcome that.
And I guess it's just like knocking at the door at vendors and saying, hey, we want to have this.
Hello.
Okay.
Yeah.
So you said there is unified procurement so you can buy license for all the different softwares if you want, like professional support and stuff.
Is there also like a single point of contact for support?
If I want to self-host this and have some issues with any of the softwares in the suite, who do I ask if I have problems?
And is there someone who can help me and do I have to know which software has the problem?
And also second question, what's your favorite pizza?
Thank you.
Okay.
Good question.
So the question is like, is there central support for the whole product?
And actually, I don't know that much.
I think it's not different yet.
Yeah.
Something that needs to be developed.
It's part of what you said about the whole package.
It's part of the discussion on the business model, basically.
But I think it's more important to be first built the software now integrated and make it open source and available for everyone for free.
And second question, the favorite pizza.
Oh yeah.
There are many.
Okay.
How are you?
No, how are you?
Okay.
Maybe one last question because it's about like, it's about 40 seconds left and then we have to go to the next question.
Let me go back there.
Not just not a question, but a remark.
Hi, I'm Renee.
I'm with Zenders for two days now.
And I'll be happy to take any questions or feedback on Open Desk with me.
I'll be out to talk.
Thank you.
Okay.
Really cool.
Sure.
So my question is there are huge parts of software stack that are still, I think, vendor tied outside of, for example, just office software, I guess.
So is there a way to get the software stack to be open source?
Yeah.
So I think it's a good idea to have a lot of people who are interested in the software stack.
For example, like GitHub is one of the biggest ones.
There is an alternative in GitLab.
And operating systems, BIOS, hardware.
I mean, I physically have problems to understand the question.
So what's the question?
Like if there are other software going to be integrated or?
There is a huge part of the computer science ecosystem such as going down from hardware all the way up to operating systems.
So the different layers.
Different layers.
Is there, you know, movements to free those?
Yeah.
So OpenDesk focuses on the desk, the working desk.
So the tools that you need on your machine in order to work together.
That's the current scope.
There's not the scope of controlling the hardware or the operating system.
That's a different story.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.